# James Gosling - Dr. Java

### Introduction and Background
Over the summer, I worked as a Software Development Engineering Intern at Amazon Web Service (AWS). My team often collaborated with other teams across the globe, rushing to complete features to be announced at AWS re:Invent this year. James Gosling led one of these teams. Every engineer that I encountered at AWS revered Gosling as an extremely talented computer scientist, capable of solving problems of enormous complexity. It was not until I looked into Goslings past accomplishments that I realised how justified this admiration was.  
  
Gosling was born on the 19th of May 1955 in Alberta, Canada. After receiving a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science from the University of Calgary, he went on to continue his studies at Carnegie Mellon University as a graduate student. While working on his doctorate, he built a multi-processor version of Unix for a 16-way computer system and developed various compilers and mail systems. Goslings dissertation, entitled "The Algebraic Manipulation of Constraints", focussed on the problem of performing constraint satisfaction in an interactive graphical layout system.  

### Gosling Emacs
Gosling's first contribution to the world of software engineering came in 1981 when he created Gosling Emacs. Gosling Emacs (often shortened to "Gosmacs" or "gmacs") is a discontinued Emacs implementation written in C. Initially, Gosling permitted the free distribution of "Gosmacs", as required by the "Emacs commune" since the 1970s. Engineers admired Gosling Emacs for its unique display code that used a dynamic programming technique to solve the classical string-to-string correction problem and was so sophisticated that a skull-and-crossbones in ASCII art headed it. The skull-and-crossbones was to warn other programmers that even if they thought they understood how the display code worked, they probably did not.    
  
Richard Stallman used some Gosling Emacs code in the initial version of GNU Emacs, rewriting some of the code headed by skull-and-crossbones to make it "…shorter, faster, clearer and more flexible". Gosling later sold "Gosmacs" to UniPress, who then asked Stallman to stop distributing his version of Emacs. Gosling Emacs code was removed entirely from GNU Emacs by version 16.56. These disputes inspired the creation of the first formal license for Emacs, which later became the GNU General Public License, as Congress had introduced copyright for software in 1980.

### The impact of Gosling Emacs
While we cannot credit Gosling with the creation of the GPL, we can recognise the role that Gosling Emacs played in the early stages of the license. The original GPL was based on a unification of similar licenses used for early versions of GNU Emacs, the GNU Debugger and the GNU C Compiler. The relationship between the GNU Emacs License and Gosling Emacs is clear, as Stallman created the GNU Emacs License following the removal of Gosling Emacs code in GNU Emacs. These three licenses contained similar provisions to the modern GPL but were specific to each program, rendering them incompatible, despite being the same license. 
  
Richard Stallman wrote the GPL in 1989 to produce one license that could be used for any project, thus making it possible for many projects to share code. Historically, the GPL license family has been one of the most popular software licenses in the free and open-source software domain. Prominent free software programs licensed under the GPL include the Linux kernel and the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC). 
